In this video we'll learn about a really great feature that was added in C++ 11 the range based for
loop this loop really makes C++ feel like modern programming language.
The idea with the range based for loop is to loop through a collection of elements and be able to easily
access each element without having to worry about the length of the collection or incrementing or decrement
looping variables or subscripting indexes.
The syntax is very simple and elegant.
We have the keyword four followed by open and closed parentheses as usual inside the parentheses we
provide the type and name for the variable we want to use in the loop body.
This variable will be bound to each element of the collection so it should be of the same type as the
collection elements.
Then we provide a colon and the collection or collection name.
That's it.
Now when we access the variable name in the body of the loop it will have a specific element in the
collection.
Pretty cool.
Let's see an example in this example our collection is an array of integers named scores that we've
initialized to 100 90 and 97.
And here's the code that iterates over that collection using the range based forelimb noticed that in
the parentheses we provide the type of each array element.
In this case it's an integer and we provide the variable name that we can use in the body of the loop.
In this case score finally we provide a colon and the name of the collection which is scores.
That's it.
Now we can you score in the body of the loop the loop displays one hundred ninety and ninety seven which
are the elements in the array.
See how much cleaner less error prone this is.
It was a great addition to C++ we actually don't have to explicitly provide the type of the variable.
Instead we can use the auto keyword.
This tells the C++ compiler to deduce the type itself.
In other words you're asking the C++ compiler to figure out the type based on the declarations.
So in this case the compiler sees that you are using a collection scores in the loop.
So it looks it scores and it sees that it's an array of integers so it uses an integer for the score
variable.
Pretty easy actually in this case using auto versus It doesn't really bias much but C++ can have very
complex collections and sometimes defining the type of a collection variable can be quite long and tricky
auto makes it dead simple.
And this example we want to calculate the average temperature from a vector that contains doubles that
represent temperatures the vector in this case is called temp's and it contains four doubles in order
to calculate the average temperature in this vector.
We need to iterate over the vector axis each temperature.
Add them all up and divide by 4.
That's it.
Notice the for loop and how simple it is.
It's saying loop through the temp's collection and each time through a sign of temperature from the
vector to the loop variable temp which the compiler deduced is to be a double.
We add this to a running sum.
Then when the loop is done we perform a simple division to get the average.
Notice that I'm using the vector's size method which returns the number of elements in the vector.
In this case it would turn for the range based for loop can also use an initializer list as a collection.
Let's see that one this example also calculates the average for temperatures.
Notice how we can explicitly provide the collection right in the for loop.
This is sometimes handy when you know the elements of your collection ahead of time and they won't change.
The only downside is that you have to calculate the sizes you go in this last example.
We can use the range based for loop to iterate over a string which is a collection of characters.
In this case the string is a literal Frank but it could be a variable.
We're going to discuss strings in the next section of the course.
Well that pretty much covers the basics of the range based for loop.
Let's head over to the ID and see some examples.
I'm in the code like ID in the section 9 workspace in the range based for loop project what I'd like
to do in this example is go over a couple of examples of using the range based for loop with an array
with a vector and with a string.
So the first thing we'll do is just use a simple array and they'll notice that I've already included
vector right appear.
Since I'm going to use vector in a minute.
So let's create an array of integers and we'll call it scores and we'll initialize it just say 10 20
and 30.
OK.
So what we want to do now is we want to iterate through that collection.
It's an array in this case using the range based for loop.
It's as simple as can be we can say for it because we know we've got integers here.
And what do we want to call each and we'll call it score his that's what it is a single score that we
have the colon and then we provide the name of the collection in this case scores.
So that's the loop header and then all we really need to do here is just say see out and display the
score.
That's it.
Let's run this and that's exactly what we get 10 20 and 30.
Now as I mentioned in the in the slides we don't have to provide that in there we can simply use the
auto keyword.
And what's going to happen here.
I mean it's pretty straightforward but it's important that you understand what's going on.
You're telling the compiler to figure out the type.
So the compiler is going to come in here and say OK what's going on.
The collection is scores.
OK scores is an array of integers so this must be an it.
So he's going to deduce that type right here to beat it.
Same as we did before.
As I mentioned this is not a big deal it's easy to type and it's easy to type auto but collections in
C++ especially generic collections and templates get really crazy syntax and sometimes it's very difficult
to to write exactly the type that you want.
And this just makes it so easy you just type auto and the compiler will figure it out which is great.
That's what we're doing here we just printed out the score is really really easy let me run this using
the auto key word now you can see the behavior is exactly the same.
All right.
Perfect.
Let me comment that out and let's do another example.
In this case we'll create a vector.
So let's create a vector of doubles and we'll just call it temperatures and we'll initialize these to
let's say eighty seven point nine seventy seven point nine.
Could be really any numbers you like 80 eighty zero.
And how about seventy two point five.
So those are the four temperatures that I'm interested in.
Maybe their temperature is per week per year for a month.
It doesn't really matter.
It all depends on what you try to do.
Now what we want to do is we want to calculate the average of the mean of those temperatures.
All right.
So we're going to need that the average itself so we'll just call it average temp and it's a double
initialized to zero.
And we also need a double that's going to be the running total because we need to sum them all up and
then divide them by whatever size that vector is.
In this case it happens to be four but it could be any size we want.
So there's my double I'd call it total initialized to zero.
All right so now let's loop through that vector.
So we'll say for auto That's create the variable temp.
Be one of those temperatures one at each iteration.
And the name of the collection is temperatures where we do we say total plus equals temp.
And I'll scroll up just a little bit myself a little bit of room.
That's it.
Now we divide by the size of that temperatures vector.
But before we do that always make sure that that size is not equal to zero because we don't want to
divide by zero error.
So we'll just say something like If temperatures drop size that's the method for the vector if that's
equal to zero then we don't want to do the division right.
So what do we want to do we want to make sure it's not what is zero.
If it's not equal to zero it's safe to divide.
And what I'll say is as simple as average temp is equal to the total divided by the temperatures that
size again.
Number of elements in that vector.
That's it.
Notice we don't have to do any casting here because total This is an unsigned integer right here it's
going to return the size which is an unsigned integer.
But total we defined as a double so it's going to do double division.
All right.
So that's it will output.
Now you say something like average temperature is
average temp.
Put an end line at the end and let's run this.
There's the average temperature seventy nine point five seven five.
Now let me show you one of the IO manipulators that you can use.
And as I said I'll cover these later on in the in the course.
There's a whole bunch of them and they're not all that important but they're all they're important to
to help us format our output what we can do is we can say first thing we need to do is we each go up
top here and include I O manip that's the IO manipulation operators.
And what we do here is right before we output we can say see out fixed and then set precision to let's
say 1.
That's one number after the decimal point and it will round.
So in this case let's run that and now you'll see this formatted as seventy nine point six I think before
it was seventy nine point five seven five or something like that I don't recall.
But it's going to rounded up to 70 9.6.
It's always going to have one digit to the right of the decimal point.
If this is what you need this is an easy way to do it otherwise.
Seventy nine point five seven five works for me.
All right so that'll take care of this example.
Let me show you a couple more examples and again I'll comment these out so they don't keep executing.
Let's put in an initializer list right into the loop.
This is not something you see very often but I wanted to show you in case you do see it you know what's
going on.
This case will say for again auto and the value will be Val.
And right in here we can put the initialiser list.
We can say 1 2 3 4 5.
Sometimes you see this when you know that these numbers are ahead of time.
And in this case we could just say see out Vau and we can do in mind here.
So what's going to happen is it's going to iterate through that collection remember this is a collection
and it's going to display one two three four and five and it's run that real quick.
And there you can see the one two three four and five.
Now the last example I want to show you is with a string.
Now there's two kinds of strings and C++.
There is a C style string and there's a C plus plus string.
I'm going to cover these in the next section.
What we're going to use here is just a C-style string.
That's what we've been using all along.
That's a bunch of characters inside double quotes.
So what I want to do is I'm just going to say for again audio in this case is going to be a character
type I'll call it C and my collection is basically a bunch of characters write a sequence of characters
so this is a test.
That's it.
What can I do in here.
Well I can output the character and I'm not going to put a new line because I don't want a newline at
the end of every character that I print them up and down.
In this case it should just print that string right back out at me.
And there you see right up here.
This is a test.
So it's putting it out directly out at me.
Suppose I wanted to skip the spaces.
How would I do that.
Well we just filter the spaces that I would say if the character I'm looking at c in this case right
is not equal to a space.
Then print the character.
So what's going to happen here again at each iteration I'm looking at that character.
If it's not a space I print it if it is a space I'm not doing anything.
So I'm basically just getting rid of all of the spaces inside that string.
So when I display that you should see you see that right there.
This is a test.
All bunched up together.
OK.
Now suppose I wanted to replace the.
And again we're not changing the string here we're just pointing out the string one character at a time.
Suppose what I wanted to do was every time there's a space I want to replace it with a tab character.
I want to display the tab.
I want to spread these characters out a little bit.
Well we can change the logic here a little bit and again let me comment this.
So it's available for you to play with.
And
do something like that just so I can just modify a little bit of code and get this to run right.
OK.
So we're here in the same position I'm going to comment this out and so I'm reading the string again
I've got each character in C and I'm going to say if C is the space then I don't want to print out the
space what I want to do is I want to print out a tab and if I remember the tab is a slash T.
Otherwise I'll just want to protect the character right.
Anything except the space.
Something like that.
So let's try that out.
And there you go it says this then you see a tab is them a tab A and a tab and test and so forth.
We could play all kinds of games you can replace one character with another.
You can create your own little cipher if you want that.
You can send across to a friend and they can decipher it on the other side.
Anyway that's pretty much the range based for loop.
There's a couple of examples I've shown you here that hopefully make it really really easy I mean this
is so much simple.
Notice again there is no and there's no plus plus I were not counting we're simply looping through a
collection and we don't even have to worry about the type with the auto.
So it makes it really easy to think at a very high level to solve your problems without getting bogged
down with all the little details.
OK.
So that's the end of this video.